complete rewrite of simp.md (#156)
leanprover-community/leanprover-community.github.io: templates/extras/simp.md

# Simp

## Overview

In this document we will explain basic usage of Lean's simplifier,
`simp`, and the related tactic `dsimp`.

## Introduction

Lean has a "simplifier", called `simp`. This is a tactic whose job,
unfortunately for beginners, is *not* to prove an arbitrary simple
statement. Lean's simplifier is what is called a "conditional term
rewriting system". Rewriting is the act of changing a goal of the form
`P(A)` into `P(B)`, given a hypothesis of the form `A = B` or `A ↔
B`. The simplifier's job is to try and prove, or at least simplify,
goals or hypotheses, by using repeated rewrites. Here is an example
(using `mathlib`).

```lean
import algebra.group.defs

variables (G : Type) [group G] (a b c : G)

example : a * a⁻¹ * 1 * b = b * c * c⁻¹ :=
begin
  simp
end
```

How would a human solve that goal? They would notice that `a * a⁻¹ =
1`, that `1 * 1 = 1` and so on, until they had simplified the example
to `b = b`, which is obviously true. This is also what the simplifier

> is doing. Indeed, if you add `set_option trace.simplify.rewrite true`

Reviewer: Could you mention `set_option trace.simplify true` as well? I think I've referred a few people to this page on Zulip for these trace options.

Author: Done.

`simp` (in VS Code) and clicking on this will show you the sequence of
rewrites that `simp` discovered.

## Simp lemmas

So how did Lean's simplifier know that `a * a⁻¹ = 1`? It is because
the corresponding lemma in `algebra.group.defs` is tagged with the
`simp` attribute:

```lean
@[simp] lemma mul_right_inv (a : G) : a * a⁻¹ = 1 := ...
```

This `@[simp]` at the beginning just "tags" `mul_right_inv` with the
`simp` attribute. We call lemmas tagged in this way "`simp`
lemmas". Here are some examples of `simp` lemmas in mathlib:

```lean
@[simp] theorem nat.dvd_one {n : ℕ} : n ∣ 1 ↔ n = 1 := ...
@[simp] theorem mul_eq_zero {a b : ℕ} : a * b = 0 ↔ a = 0 ∨ b = 0 := ...
@[simp] theorem list.mem_singleton {a b : α} : a ∈ [b] ↔ a = b := ...
@[simp] theorem set.set_of_false : {a : α | false} = ∅ := ...
```

When the simplifier is attempting to simplify a term `T` it looks
through the `simp` lemmas known to the system at that time, in a
sensible way (there are over ten thousand of them currently in
`mathlib`!), and if it runs into a lemma of the form `A = B` or `A ↔
B`, for which `A` shows up in `T`, it rewrites the lemma at `T` to

> replace it with a `B`, and starts again.

Reviewer: Worth mentioning here (with an example, maybe) that `simp` works "inside-out".

Author: I don't know what this means. Can you sketch the idea? I still have no idea how simp works, I just now know what it does.

Reviewer: [Here's](https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/113488-general/topic/Simp.20normal.20form/near/188829903) a post by Gabriel that I starred in Zulip about this:

> The simplifier simplifies terms inside-out, that is, it first simplifies the arguments of a function before simplifying the function. Hence a simp lemma is only ever used to rewrite terms where the arguments are already fully simplified (= in simp-normal form). Corollary: if the left-hand side of your simp lemma has an argument that is not fully simplified, then this simp lemma is never used to rewrite a term by the simplifier and is hence useless.

replace `1` with `a * a⁻¹`, which is usually not a sensible direction
of travel. Furthermore, if both `mul_right_inv` and
`mul_right_inv_bad` are tagged with `simp` then this would cause the
simplifier to loop.

However, `mathlib` has a linter, which one can call with `#lint` in a
Lean file, and which will attempt to flag any problems with `simp`
lemmas in the file.

When making a new definition, it is very common to have `@[simp]`
lemmas which train the simplifier how to use the definition in a
sensible manner. An example of this is in mathlib's
[data.complex.basic](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/blob/master/src/data/complex/basic.lean),
which has almost 100 `simp` lemmas in. Theorems such as `@[simp] lemma
add_re (z w : ℂ) : (z + w).re = z.re + w.re := rfl` are proved in that
file, even though they are true by definition, because they are
important `simp` lemmas. The very slick proof in that file that the
complex numbers are a commutative ring uses `simp` at a key moment to
reduce goals such as `(z + w).re = (w + z).re` into `z.re + w.re =
w.re + z.re`, which is a statement about real numbers which the `ring`
tactic can solve.

## Basic usage 

> `simp` -- tries to simplify the goal using all `simp` lemmas known to

Author: I have removed the indentation. I don't really know anything about markdown, web pages or anything. Sorry. I've also removed the dashes -- I decided they weren't really adding anything.

          Lean at that time.

`simp [h1, h2]` -- uses all `simp` lemmas and also `h1` and `h2`
                   (which can either be local hypotheses or other lemmas which
		   are not tagged `simp` for some reason).

`simp [← h]` -- uses all `simp` lemmas, and also `h : A = B` but in
                 the form `B = A` (so `simp` rewrites `B`s to `A`s)

> `simp [-h]` -- stops `simp` from using lemma `h`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should say `simp [-thm]`, to make it clear that what goes there is not a local hypothesis but a defined theorem.

Author: Thanks.

`simp *` -- uses all `simp` lemmas and also all current local
            hypotheses to try to simplify the goal.

`simp at h` -- tries to simplify `h` using all `simp` lemmas.

`simp [h1] at h2 ⊢` -- tries to simplify both `h2` and the goal using
                       `h1` and all `simp` lemmas (note: type `⊢` with

>                        `\|-` in VS Code).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                       `\|-` or `\vdash` in VS Code).
```

Author: Done

```

will attempt to turn any occurrences of `a ∈ (s : set α)` into the
correct normal form.

## non-terminal `simp`s, and `simpa`

The behaviour of `simp` can change over time. More precisely, as more
`simp` lemmas are added to a repository, the smarter `simp` gets. This
means that updates to your code can cause proofs which use `simp` in
the middle, to break. For example if a proof looked like

```
  ...
  simp,
  rw foo_eq_bar,
  ...
```

and then later on someone added the `@[simp]` tag to `foo_eq_bar`,
then this rewrite would now fail, and errors like this can at times be
quite confusing to fix. If you really want to apply `simp` in the
middle of a proof and not close a goal completely, there are several
"approved" ways to do it:

1) Use `squeeze_simp` instead of `simp`. This produces output of the
form `simp only [h1, h2, ..., hn]`, which can be used instead of
`simp` to perform the same task. `simp only` is much safer to use in
the middle of a proof, because the simplifier is now constrained to
only using the lemmas in the list, so will not be affected by changes
to the `simp` set (the collection of lemmas tagged `simp`).

> 2) `simpa`. If `simp` turns your goal into `h`, then you can write

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2) `simpa`. If `simp` turns your goal into `P`, then you can write
```

Author: Thanks

```
suffices : P,
  simpa,
```

which will add an extra goal of `h`, and then prove it using `simp`
and the hypothesis `this`, which is the proof of `P` which the
`suffices` tactic adds.

## `dsimp`

`dsimp` is a variant of `simp` which only uses `simp` lemmas whose
proof is `rfl` or `iff.rfl`, i.e. lemmas of the form `A = B` or `A ↔ B`
where `A` and `B` are equal by definition. Like `simp` it is not
recommended to use it in the middle of a proof, however if `dsimp`
turns your goal into `h` then `change h` might well do the same thing.
Another common use of `dsimp` is

```
dsimp only
```

which can be a very useful way of tidying up a goal. It can be safely
used in the middle of a proof because of the `only`. This command
tidies up lambdas (it will turn `(λ x, f x) 37` into `f 37`, and

> `{to_fun := f, ...}.to_fun` into `f`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`{to_fun := f, ...}.to_fun` into `f`).
```

Author: Thanks

## More advanced features.

`simp {single_pass := tt}` -- this `single_pass` is a config option,
one of around 16 at the time of writing. One can use `single_pass` to
avoid loops which would otherwise occur.

Searching for `structure simp_config` in the file
`init/meta/simp_tactic.lean` in core Lean reveals other config

> options, not all of them documented.

Reviewer 2: Would it be helpful to document all of them in this file? I can probably give short descriptions of all of them with some spelunking. Most of them aren't very relevant for the average user.

Reviewer: That'd be great! There is a list of them at the bottom of the file, but very few of them have descriptions.

variant when stating lemmas in Lean. For example, most lemmas which
assume a natural is non-zero do it via the hypothesis `0 < n`.

In general, if you are writing a lemma, you should know the "normal
form" way to express the ideas in the lemma. If you are writing a
lemma about a definition you made yourself, you might want to make
your own design decision about the "normal form" way of expressing any
idea which can be naturally expressed in more than one way.

An example of a simp-normal form is a way of expressing nonemptiness
of a subset of a type.  If `α : Type` and `s : set α` then
nonemptiness of `s` can be expressed as `s.nonempty` and as `s ≠ ∅`.
In mathlib an effort is made to stick to `s.nonempty` as the normal
form.

Another example: if `s : finset α` and `a : α` then `a ∈ s` is defined
to mean `a ∈ (s : set α)`. The simp normal form for this idea is `a ∈
s`, and moreover the `simp` lemma

```
@[simp] lemma mem_coe {a : α} {s : finset α} : a ∈ (s : set α) ↔ a ∈ s := ...
```

will attempt to turn any occurrences of `a ∈ (s : set α)` into the
correct normal form.

Because the simplifier works from the inside out, simplifying arguments

> of a function before simplifying the function, a `simp` lemma should
> always have all of its arguments already in simp-normal form. Mathlib's

Reviewer 4: The issue is with the (arguments of the) LHS of the simp lemma, not the arguments to the lemma itself. For instance, if you have @[simp] lemma fg (cond : P) : f (g 0) = 0 but g 0 already simplifies to something else, fg will never fire. I read "arguments of fg" as referring to hypotheses like cond, but it doesn't matter if cond is in simp-normal form.
 
```suggestion
the arguments of the left hand side of a simp lemma 
should already be in simp-normal form. Mathlib's
```
?
You could add an example if you want.

Author: Thanks. It's clear that I'm not really the best person to be writing this page, however I am very much motivated to get something better than what we currently have because students can ask direct questions such as "how can I learn about `simp`?". Thanks all of you for the help you've given.
